# landsat-forest-monitoring

Repository of the master thesis "Methodological Framework for Long-Term Satellite-Based Forest Monitoring in the Canton of Bern: Combining Geospatial Forest Data with 35 years of Landsat 5 and 7 Imagery Products".

### Abstract
Forests are under increasing pressure from climate change, which is endangering the pro-vision of their ecosystem services. In the canton of Bern, tree species are expected to ex-perience a mountain upwards shift due to climate change induced transformations of for-ests site types, making comprehensive forest monitoring essential. Remote sensing plat-forms, especially the Landsat missions, are widely used for forest monitoring, as they pro-vide large spatial and temporal coverage. However, there is currently no method to effi-ciently create Landsat 5 and Landsat 7 datasets that are suitable for forest monitoring studies of the canton of Bern, including direct comparability with geospatial data on forest change. This thesis provides a methodological framework for the development and anal-ysis of Landsat 5-7 datasets from 1985-2019 as baseline data for forest monitoring in the canton of Bern by 1) converting geospatial forest data on altitudinal vegetation belts (AVBs) from Zischg et al. (2021) into Landsat grid and netCDF format, 2) creating cleaned and masked Landsat 5-7 mosaic images, 3) calculating selected Vegetation Indices (VIs), 4) compiling annual Maximum Value Composites (MVC), and finally, as a proof of concept, developing a time series analysis approach with a custom linear regression function that is able to handle multidimensional raster data and to retrieve trend and p-values. Apart from a few geodata operations at the beginning, all processing steps were carried out in the Python environment. The result consisted of Python scripts and the created data for each processing step, including the time series analysis. This method therefore made it possible to transfer forest height classifications from the AVBs to the processed Landsat 5-7 images including VIs and annual MVCs. Consequently, these classes were integrated into the time series analysis in order to summarize significant trends in the respective AVBs, showing higher annual increasing mean values for NDVI, LAI, and NDMI in forests of higher altitude compared to lower altitude regions in the canton of Bern. NDMI showed negative trend values for forests at lower elevations and was the only VI to show negative trend values at all. The Python scripts and the data generated from them provide a clean and computationally efficient framework that can be used for forest monitoring studies, such as the presented time series analysis method, and can provide interesting infor-mation on the development of the forests of the canton of Bern from a remote sensing perspective. Since remote sensing products are subject to limitations, like atmospheric interactions, sensor variations, mixed pixels, soil background reflectance, and uneven temporal data sampling distribution, its interpretation to actual changes on the Earth's surface requires further, careful investigations. Nevertheless, the framework provides a comprehensive basis for forest monitoring and other RS-based analyses for the canton of Bern.
